Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob and today Igen
by Doctor Sophia Force. She is a bus on
a group leader in the Department of Evolutionary Biology
and Environmental Studies at the University of Zurich in
Switzerland. Her research interests include animal behavior, comparative cognition,
behavioral ecology, animal curiosity and innovativeness, social learning in
animals, the captivity effect on animal cognition, developmental influences
on cognitive development and the effects of urbanization on
animal behavior. And we're going to talk a little
bit about that today but focusing mostly on neo
phobia. All apes respond to novel objects, curiosity, cultural
intelligence, the evolution of intelligence and creativity. So Doctor
Farce, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you. Thank you.
So I, I would like to start by asking
you about neophobia, but just before we get into
the topic itself, uh how did you become interested
in these aspects of ape behavior? What got you
here? Exactly. Yeah.
So that started through, through my master thesis. Actually,
I did a work with wild orangutans in the
Forest of Sumatra in, in Indonesia and because of,
of the observations I did in how much they
learn and how much they are actually like exploring
their, their environment. I get very interested in understanding
how they react to new things if they encounter
new things in their, the environment. Because it's a,
it's a trait that is sort of such a
hardwired necessary cognitive mechanism for our own species. And
it just started by us trying to understand how,
how they would react when they meet and encounter
things that they have never seen before.
Uh, SO neophobia, I, I mean, just in simple
terms would be the fear of the new fear
of the novel, being fearful of novel objects, novel
reps, people, novel things, novel foods, stuff like that.
Yes, I think that as a, as a broad
term, you can see as a protection mechanism for
an animal or also for a human being for
that matter to not engage in something risky and
because new things can be risky before we know
them. We don't know, um, if they are safe
or not. And so, you know, phobia is, uh,
it's not, it's an innate protection mechanism that, that
we have to protect us from, from that. And
you can apply the concept of course to different
uh situations, whether it is, uh, objects and artifacts,
new food, new situations, new social situations and even
new spaces.
And, uh, how do you study exactly how different
ape species respond to novel objects? How do you
do it.
Yeah. So with the apes, it's um it's very
tricky to study these things in their natural habitat.
Nevertheless, it's super interesting and important that we do.
So because that's, of course, the environment where they
have evolved these traits. And in my studies on
this topic actually took start with studying the wild
orangutans and their reactions on the neophobia to noble
objects. And we did this by making platforms up
in the canopy, which is quite tricky because these
guys are climbing around the forest. And we had
to, to make a situation where they can encounter
something suspicious or something that triggers their interest in
a otherwise very familiar environment. And so we build
these platforms and they put up things that we
thought would be new to them, but nevertheless, not
scare them away that even if we talk about
new phobias, as there is a potential cautiousness to
new things, the aim is not to scare animals.
The aim is actually to see what is the
response. If something is providing a new inform informative
uh value. And by hanging up, for example, in
the canopy of wild apes, uh new flowers or
new fruits that they have never seen before, you
can measure how likely they are to engage in
exploring that. And whereas with captive apes, you can
do this, of course, on a on a very
different level where you can provide them directly with
things. So, so there's a huge difference in, in,
in the mythologies and the results depending on what
type of A I DS you study.
Yeah. And what can we learn from studying how
they respond to novel objects? I mean, is it
that we are learning just about neophobia or are
there other aspects of their cognition, their psychology that
we can also make influences about by studying neophobia?
Yes. So it's a, it's a window into, as
I said, like the ideal situation is that you
trigger something unexpected for that animal. And then to
understand how, how the animal is reacting. When there
is uh an unexpected situation with new information, we
can see multiple things and one is a window
into if they show curiosity. And this is something
that uh the novel object test paradigm is just
one dimension out of many, of course. But by
also understanding how animals are reacting to new things
in their environment, we can learn something about how
the environment is shaping them to when they react
by studying this across different environments within a species,
for example. And that way we get a better
understanding for how ecological conditions or social settings impact
these kind of call them underlying cognitive traits.
And to get a little bit more concrete here.
W which kinds of ape uh species do you
study neophobia in? Exactly. Yeah.
So, so far I've been studying orangutans and there's
two species of orangutans that we've been researching this
topic in the Bornean and the sumatran orangutans. I've
also studied the same topic with identical methods in
both chimpanzees and bonobos. So two African ape species
and Asian great apes
and uh which kinds of objects do you usually
expose them to? And what are usually the reactions
you get from them in which specific circumstances? And
are there big differences in new phobia behaviors across
ape species or not?
Yes. So there's multiple questions that I would say
to if I can just tag it. So depending
on, on the habitat or the environment, the setting
where we're testing them, if we are talking about
testing wild apes or if we're talking about testing
captive apes uh will definitely change uh what kind
of objects we uh expose them to. Because when,
when I started off with uh studying wild orangutans,
as I mentioned earlier, we want to create a
situation where there might be some relevance for them.
So that's just not a random artifact. But what
if if something could be like a potential food
source or if it's uh something that looks like
something I had before? But it's not something I
know. So it's like in human curiosity, you have
a U shaped curve as well in how likely
we are to become curious if something is too
foreign, we rather get scared. If something that's too
familiar, it's not gonna capture our our intention and
definitely not spark curiosity. And that's something we try
to reach with the orangutans as well that we
show them new fruits that never seen before. That
do not exist in the Sumatran rain forest like
pineapples or, or for example, also plastic fruits and
see how they react to things that they might
think. Hey, this could be useful for me. Nevertheless,
be cautious because you don't know if it uh
has any potential dangers. We also tested them towards
um uh different kind of flowers that they do
not encounter otherwise in their habitat. So sort of
written in a natural situation, what if there would
suddenly be a new fruiting tree that they never
had before breathe. If you go and test captive
apes, it's rather difficult to because their habitat is
so different than they are used to many artifacts
provided by humans. So they have a completely different
reference point from the start. So here, what we
do is um not expecting a a strong reaction,
but we do talk to caregivers that normally know
the background history of of these uh individuals on
what would be suitable items and what they have
never seen before. And just like for human kids,
what we normally do is we just compose some
new kind of toy that because that object hasn't
existed some, even if they might know some of
the colors or some of the materials, they do
not know it as such as it's composed in
that particular study.
And so, uh I mean, let me ask you
one question because you mentioned uh food there. Uh
IS it the case that when these animals are
exposed to novel foods, they are able to identify
these new objects as food, as something they could
eat or not?
So that's if you step one step back, if
I see something that I don't never seen before,
and if it has the shape of something that
I might be eating, then at the first perceptional
level, you cannot distinguish between food and object. So
you're gonna have to explore in order to find
out. Now when it comes to, to eggs, they
have quite a high threshold of how likely they
are to try new food because that's just simply
something you don't wanna risk when you're a long
lived species and you might not want to go
out and eat something that potentially could have been
poisonous. So the there will be a difference in
how much you explore physically to actually trying to
eat something. And we see that not only from
doing experimental work, but also by natural observations where
you can see that infant apes normally take quite
a long time before they eat things like they
have certainly had enough exposure to social information to
their mothers and others before they take the step
to integrate something into their own uh internet.
And, and when it comes to the differences between
wild and captive apes that you mentioned there briefly,
uh do they basically have o only to do
with uh the captive apes, for example, having been
exposed to a wider variety of objects and so
many of them, they no longer have neophobia reactions
to or are there also other differences here?
Yeah. So this is one of the, the bigger
questions that we that I've been looking at and
it's certainly multiple factors that uh play a role
to why captive apes would behave totally different when
we test them in, in, um novel object tests
or even also problem solving and stuff that we
have done uh along the lines as well. And
first, it's important that one think about them as,
but it's the same animal physically. It's a different
animal psychologically because of the different environments totally shaping
them into, into something, taking them on a different
trajectory and in your outlook on life and environment
and, and everything actually. So, uh one of the
components, of course, environment by itself, like if you
do live in a, in a zoo or let's
say a wildlife sanctuary where life is quite decent
and you get fed every day. Um, YOU have
in one way, the five star hotel, uh lottery,
you know, you don't have to worry, you don't
have to forage. You certainly do not have any
predators and any hazards. So there's the risk free
environment that is one component to why captive animals
per se are more explorative and more innovative than
the wild Conspecific. And then on top of that,
because of this risk free thing, especially in large
brain species, what comes with it is that when
you don't have to allocate uh time to foraging
or finding a partner or looking for shelter and
all these kind of uh things that animals are
totally busy in their daily life in Asia, then
that frees up the space that you have in
terms of cognitive capacities and that sort of gives
room for everything that comes comes from it in
terms of exploration, curiosity, creativity, innovativeness. So it's a,
it's when you do not have that load, cognitive
load of, of survival existence, you are free to
do other things. That's another, that's the second factor.
And as a third factor, it's all. And this
is a layer that comes in because the way
captive apes, for example, particularly are housed in captivity,
they are uh care for by humans. And as
much as we like to think that we are
keeping our distance and treating them as, as just
animals, they are close enough that they totally relate
and can attend to our actions and our behaviors.
And we are an additional social influence in their
lives. And I think that has a massive effect
on how they learn to learn about their environment.
And so according to the research you have and
the work you've done, can we say that captive
apes and monkeys are in general less neophobia and
more curious than wild apes and monkeys or not.
Yes. So, I think that they are less neophobia,
uh, than wild apes because this life in captivity
has sort of eroded that initial neophobia that, that
they probably had, you're still gonna find captive apes
that show certain situations where they're skeptical towards things.
So it's not that you totally get, get away.
Yeah. Yeah. Uh, AND, and I would imagine that
perhaps some of that would also have to do
with their personality traits or, or not.
Absolutely. You'll find along the spectrum, uh, the same
as humans, you'll find the apes that are more
or less and, uh, neophobia than others. And we
don't know, sometimes we can disentangle the reasons to
why and sometimes we just can't.
Mhm. And going back just a little bit to
novel food response. I mean, how do wipes particularly
in the wild, evolve lower ne phobia when there's
a risk, as we've already mentioned here of harmful
and poisonous food intake?
Yeah. So this is a, uh, this is clearly
done by a true social information because, uh, you
have no single ape species and maybe not even
a single primary species where infants do not spend
time around uh adult role models in order to
learn the diet, I think, particularly with the gray
apes where there is not only the level of
learning what to eat, but also the level of
learning how to eat because you need to understand
which species are, are distinguishable from others. And this
is not as easy. Like if you put a
human being into rain forest, that a human being
is not knowing what to eat. So you can
see how much information you need from, from your
role models in order to survive in such a
habitat. And that's exactly what happens with the, with
the apes. And that therefore, I would say the
social information is a channel through which wild apes
overcome neophobia by looking at, oh, if mom does
it, it's safe, I can try to eat that.
But isn't there a a sort of paradox associated
with how apes? And I would imagine also humans
deal with social information from an evolutionary perspective because
uh aren't there particular cases where perhaps we would
be better served, not really being influenced by social
information coming from other kind specifics and just exploring
things ourselves or learning uh by ourselves.
Absolutely. Like II, I think that's, that's uh certainly
situations where it matters who and things like knowledge.
Uh What's, what is the social information that is
guiding you? Is it like experts or is it
rank? Is it uh uh numbers like all these
different social uh learning strategies that we find? Um
THE research I've done so far is more towards
the developmental stage of life. And I think throughout
the development, when you are mostly influenced from, from
mothers, all of that doesn't really matter because it
is still gonna be too risky to jeopardize your
own survival before you even reach reproductive uh age.
So you're still gonna go for a social cue
rather than uh than uh risk it on your
own. And we do see this as well with,
uh for example, with orangutans that by the time
they reach uh uh sexual maturity and are also
ranging slowly away from, from their mothers. That is
a little bit of a window when they are
more open to, to explore on their own.
And and so sort of related to that, but
also talking a little bit more about uh apes
in captivity. Uh You've studied how their problem solving
skills are influenced by factors like housing facility and
captive care duration. Could you tell us about that?
Yeah. So this is something I think it is
a huge thing in the whole research area of
great ape cognition. And I think it's super important
that we pay attention to it is that all
of these experiences they get from from birth until
um we test them in for some kind of
research question. If this would be an wild ape,
we have some sort of ecological circumstances, shaping their
minds, then we can ask different questions. If it
takes the lab into a captive setting, there's all
these other experiences that feeds into who that individual
becomes and what that individual knows. So like I
think what my research shows on a very, very
broad and easy level that we're just starting to
dig into this into more higher resolution. But depending
on which group of captive um apes you research,
you will have a different result just by the
fact that for example, research experience accumulates and therefore
they have learned from that experience and that will
affect their performance. So this was uh something we
found by studying chimpanzees from a century compared to
a sue that hasn't done any cognitive tasks. So
by the sheer fact that they haven't gotten much
of those experiences compared to the other population where
it's regularly all kind of apparatuses. And so, so
in one way, you can say that as a
research community, we are imposing a bias in accumulating
their experiences. And I just started a project um
where they are quantifying this. And we are, we
are creating a database where we track the experience
of certain age subjects so that we can actually
go out and test for how much they carry
with them from one testing situation to another.
Mhm. So we've talked a lot about neophobia here.
What about curiosity, by the way, fir first of
all, what is curiosity from an evolutionary perspective?
Yeah. So neophobia and curiosity most certainly is interlinked
concepts if you look at it from an evolutionary
perspective, especially when you start to, to study these
topics in, in wild animals. Because if you take
the case of the apes. Again, naturally, you need
to be curious in order to pay attention to,
even to your mother and to things that happens
around you, you need to pay attention to. What
part of the fruit am I supposed to eat?
How is she doing that with her fingers? What
is going on? So you need to, to have
some intrinsic motivation to find out things you don't
know. And I think this is uh probably something
that's quite hardwired in human evolutionary history. And all
the great apes have a strong affinity, uh like
intrinsic motivation to be curious. Now, what happens is
uh the things we talked about uh a little
bit earlier, like if you then have a habitat
that is risky, like full of uh potentially poisonous
plants or you might have predators and all of
that then going around being curious on your own
might be very, might not be an evolutionary good
strategy because it simply will die off before you
reach a reproductive age. And so then protection mechanisms
like neophobia keeps you away from expressing your curiosity
just like that. Nevertheless, as soon as you have
a situation that is regarded as safe, that curiosity
kicks in and you can um act upon it.
And so this is where we talk about like
Hopia, high curiosity in these kind of species. And
in captivity, there's a different source there's on not
only the social component that wears down the neophobia,
so that they can become more curious or express
curiosity in, in in many different ways, but also
the risk in itself since the risk, they never
had a bad experience. So, so that's like different
pathways that brings down the neophobia and the allows
curiosity to be expressed.
Uh So, curiosity in a way is also shaped
by ecological and social factors, right? It's, of course,
we have this innate tendency to be curious, but
when it comes to perhaps understanding a little bit
better, uh the differences across species and between individuals
of the same species, it's not something that is
exclusively in or that we are born with, but
it's also shaped over development by ecological and social
factors.
Absolutely. That's, that's what I believe. I believe that
there's a baseline, intrinsic baseline for each species that
they do have because in order to learn, especially
if you're a species that live in a niche
where learning is important. So the biological function of
curiosity clearly is to aid the learning process. And
but there were gonna be differences depending on, first
of all, what happened during early life in terms
of your own social input on what to be
curious about when and when and then the other
axis of ecological factors constraining certain situations where it's
just not adaptive.
Yeah. No, that, that's very interesting because uh and
of course, we can get more into how we
can extrapolate from other apes to humans later on.
But we have these very common ideas that, for
example, when it comes to humans, there are certain
people that are innately more curious and other, less
curious. But I would imagine that probably the factors
you've studied in other apes would also apply to
humans.
Right. Yeah, I, I would believe so. I do
think that there's a, a long standard psychological view
on humans that it is this intrinsic thing and
we're all sort of born with the same. I
do think that a surprisingly little research has gone
into understanding what shapes curiosity in human Children. And
I do think that once we start to uncover
that box, we will find that it is equally
much social input during, during those early years that
also set the stage for your adult levels of
curiosity and interest in learning.
So do other apes and non human apes have
a culture,
culture? Oh, absolutely. They have culture. Yes.
Uh And uh I mean, in what ways? Uh
SO, for example, in your work, I've read about
the cultural intelligence hypothesis. So could you tell us
about this hypothesis and how it would perhaps help
us explain how other apes and humans as well,
by the way, have evolved a culture for what
reasons and so on?
Yeah. So um the cultural intelligence hypothesis builds upon
the fact that in so in some species learning
is a strategy to adapt to that species niche.
So you need learning in order to reach a
certain skill level. And this is the case for,
for all of the great apes. So you're learning
how to forage, you're learning how to build a
nest, you're learning all these things. And because you're
learning and because this, this period of learning is,
is also relatively long. So there's a lot of
like evolutionary plasticity in this uh in this period.
And that allows for culture to of course develop
uh more magnitudes because when you have different populations
learning different things, it's gonna pop up with a
different end products. Now, the the cultural intelligence hypothesis
in itself builds upon the fact that you are
learning from others. What's uh how to uh to
forage and what to eat and things like that.
And while you're doing that, there is investment, of
course, on an evolutionary way, there's investment in neurological
tissue and brain capacity to learn as good as
possible. And because evolution or natural selection are investing
in that, in that expensive brain, you're also gonna
automatically improve the things you can learn on your
own because it's the same pathways and the same
neurons in your brain. So those are interlinked. If
you learn socially. And if you're provided with a
lot of social learning opportunities throughout your developmental period,
you're also gonna become automatically better at learning things
uh by yourself. So those goes hand in hand.
And, and they also interestingly, the cultural intelligence hypothesis
is one of those that connects both social intelligence
and ecological intelligence because it's about situations where you
bring both, both things together, you're using your social
life in order to learn about your ecological niche.
And that in combination creates for a cultural,
a cultural species. Right.
Exactly. For a cultural species, a cultural niche that
require that kind of input in order to, to
become a competent, um, individual of that niche.
Mhm. And that's very interesting because if I understood
it correctly, I mean, when we think about culture,
we tend to focus a lot on being able
to learn from other people. There is social learning.
But then according to this hypothesis, another thing that
also improves is a social learning. There is learning
by ourselves.
Right. Exactly. So like the way we tested this
was with the two orangutan species that um over
evolutionary time, they've had a, a hugely different social
structure because of it all starts with, with ecology
like it does in, in biology. And so because
of e ecological references, driving different social structures in
two different um uh species or subspecies at that
time, um we then took it to the lab
or to the captive settings where we know, OK.
Now we don't have any ecological differences, but these
species have been separated for, for long enough time
that we can say if this has had an
effect on an evolutionary perspective, these guys should differ
in terms of all sort of a social learning
abilities. So we tested them in captivity in a
whole test battery of different cognitive skills that was
composed of inhibition, control, reversal, learning tool use and
innovation and causal understanding. And we did find consistent
differences between these two species so that the more
social sumatran orangutan species showed better problem solving skills
or what we call them higher intelligence in a
broader uh concept than the born in relatives. And
we do believe that this is evidence for the
fact these species have had cultural intelligence working on
them over millions of years and selected for slightly
different uh intellectual capacities. Or, you know, we take,
we, we're talking great shifts here like it's not
that the others can't do it, but it's just
the likelihood that, that they are gonna be better,
it's always gonna be s uh stronger. Mhm
A and so I, in that the ca in
the case of orangutans, do we also see differences
uh in this particular case, we're talking about intelligence
and cognitive performance between wild and captive individuals.
Yeah. So we do see uh differences between captive
and wild uh orangutans, chimpanzees, bonobos, you name it.
I think any great ape is, is the question
we need to ask is though like, although I
don't think that those differences are that we can
say the wild or captive are more intelligence, that's
the wrong way of looking at it. They are
better at the kind of problems we provide them.
And to do a fair comparison, we need to
keep the the environments constant. So like either you
compare captive to captive or wild to wild, but
they most certainly are doing better at some um
cognitive tasks because of, of their inputs during ontogeny,
during their captive life. So this is operating on
over, I think quite strongly over their motivational pathway.
So that by having had that human influence from
early age, they also get more interested, more curious,
more attentive to the certain things and, and, and
that sort of makes them score better than if
you test their freshly, you know, you, you can't
test them easily in the wild. But if you
test them in the wild, they sort of need
to get to the same habituation level before you
can do a fair comparison.
So this is also very interesting because many times
when we talk about other animals and from an
evolutionary perspective, we tend to have this very common
idea that when we, for example, compare different species,
each species has a fixed cognitive ability, a fixed
intelligence and a fixed set of cognitive skills. But
actually it's much more plastic than that. Right.
Absolutely. I think that anything and I think it
starts already in very, very small brain sizes, anything
is plastic and you can look at the brain
as a little sponge or even as an empty
uh you know, computer chip and you can program
it with whatever you like and the environment they
grow up in is what's programming it with whatever
they know later. I think this implies the plasticity
increases with the brain size of a species. But
it certainly implies that studying a species within different
habitats and different environments can tell us more about
what factors are shaping an intelligence or a particular
cognitive skill rather than compare a species with another
species that have maybe not had the same um
evolutionary or the same environment shaping that scale.
Yeah. Or even assuming that uh a particular species
has an innate set of cognitive skills. And that's
it that they can go beyond that.
They can certainly go beyond that. I think that's
happening constantly that animal surprises with the capacity they
have to do things if we give them the
right circumstances or if they are moved into an
environment where that capacities are boosted, so to speak.
And by the way, I guess that this would
apply more in the case of captive uh individuals.
But do factors like rearing conditions and human exposure
also play a role in their cognitive performance or
not.
Yes. So absolutely. This is another thing that we
tested with orangutans where we had um uh we,
we had something like about 100 different orangutans from
different uh captive facilities so that we could avoid
say like it is this particular experience they had
because they grew up in the zoo or in
this particular sanctuary. So we collected a bunch of
them. I think we had 14 or 15 facilities.
And then we did an independent test on how
just very simple, straightforward, like how interested are they
or how attentive are they towards the human? And
this is a human, they didn't have a relationship
with so not a caretaker that they know because
that obviously biases their, their emotional relationship to that
person. And then we took the scores from that
human orientation task and related it to uh how
well they did in problem solving. And what we
found is that actually like the human orientation they
show could predict over the pathway through exploration. The
more human oriented individuals would be more inclined to
explore more to explore in a diverse way. So
in a more creative way and therefore actually succeeded
with problem solving on a higher level than the
ones that were less human oriented. So I think
what we capture here is the pathway of things
and how a captive life puts on AAA cascade
of processes. Like you pay attention to different type
of social model, you get inculturated in a way
it in its various broader senses. All apes have
some kind of inculturate by humans. And that in
turn affects your creativity, your exploration and that therefore
you score more or less better over earth given
what type of task researchers are you to do?
Yeah. And, and I would imagine that uh I
mean, since we're talking about the effects that culture,
or we talked about the effects that culture might
have had on the evolution of intelligence. I in
uh we tend to have at least in the
West. Of course, this very individualistic idea of intelligence.
There are people that are simply more intelligent than
others and so on. But actually, from an evolutionary
perspective, uh it is our sociality, our social needs,
our need to acquire information from other individuals to
relate to other individuals in a way. And not
only our asocial learning that is learning by ourselves
that has played a big role in us becoming
more and more intelligent over time.
Right. Absolutely. I do think that focusing solely on,
on intelligence as, as um as one concept is
a very old school view. I think we need
to incorporate into the framework of intelligence. We need
to think about emotional factors, social intelligence if you
like or social relationships and all of that fits
in because most of the time, we don't have
a good measure of intelligence, not even for humans.
So like what most of the time, all of
these things feeds into how a person will do
in a certain situation. And it is definitely, I
think connected to underlying motivational factors.
Mhm So uh going back to Orangutan, uh we've
already talked a little bit about how they perform
cognitively in the wild in captivity and so on.
But in your work I've also read about other
aspects, having to do with their life history and
also the needing to learn hypothesis. So, could you
tell us a little bit about that and what
these factors, these aspects of their development might also
play in their cognitive performance, the their curiosity and
so on?
Yeah. So like because orangutans like many apes, but
they particularly are, are particularly slow life history, they
show a very, very prolonged developmental phase and they
take quite an extensive time to grow physically, to
reach uh body conditions and brain sizes at adult
levels. And this is an investment that is um
obviously costly. So evolution, natural selection has to balance
what to invest in in when, if this period
is gonna take so long. Um uh THE the
process on on when, when you're gonna be weaned
from your mother and what you need to know
when you do that. So this is the needing
to learn. Hypothesis has stated that the apes need
to be that grow so slowly because they have
so much skills to learn. And it simply takes
that time. It's an interaction. In fact, more coming
from the constraints of growing such a big um
uh brain because we did find that orangutans at
the age when they are leaving their mothers and
re reaching sexual reproduction, they are long ago competent
foragers within their habitats. So that would actually say
like it's more about the physical constraints of having
a slow growing body, a slow growing brain and,
and to get that ultimate peak uh of natural
selection. At the same time, it seems that the
complex the diet is so to speak, the more
there is to learn, the longer you should stay
around your mother in order to reach sufficient skill
levels before uh you are totally independent and sexually
mature. So it's a bit of a vote hypothesis.
Uh By, by the way, just out of curiosity,
how many years do orangutans usually take for, for
them to become independent from their mothers.
So this is a species difference interestingly as well.
So in the, in the more social species in
Sumatra that also according to, to research records that
we have, they have a higher um complexity of
their diet. They're also the only populations that show
tool use, et cetera. They reach, uh meaning around
77 to 8 years, 6 to 7 and, and
independence a bit later than the born and ones
that this can happen already between five and six
years. So the bone and ones are, are a
bit faster, have a little bit less complex things
to learn. Nevertheless, they are very slow compared to
the other great apes and, and even to humans.
And, and I would imagine, I mean, of course,
I, I'm not sure if this is an aspect
that you study specifically, but I would imagine that
the way we understand something like adulthood from a
biological perspective is not exactly the way that we
understand it. For example, in human societies, culturally, like,
for example, saying that at 18, you're an adult,
I mean, the uh I would imagine that from
a biological perspective, it wouldn't be the same as
that sort of social construction of adulthood. And also
even when it comes to humans and other cultural
species, it would also depend a little bit on
the cultural input. It's like, I don't know, for
example, if you're considered an adult at 18 and
not 21 perhaps there are aspects of your development
and in becoming independent that accelerate a little bit
more but due to cultural inputs as well or
I don't know if this makes sense or not.
No, surely, I mean, we are like in biology,
we always classify things according to to facts and
measurements, right? So for most, for most animals, adulthood
is defined when they reach sexual maturity. So when
they have their first infants, et cetera, and funny
enough when you put it that way, that would
make many humans not being adults even at the
age of 50. Because if we only, we cannot
take that if they have an infant, obviously reached
sexual maturity, that there is a lot of other
concepts that feed into what we see as adulthood
in humans that are completely culturally constructed. And in
animals, it gets vague if we say like, OK,
it's an adult individuals when it can forage at
the same level as the mother. But most of
the time we use so much conservative measurements of,
of sexual maturity. But it could be, I mean,
it's, it's nothing is happening over one night. So
they are maturing into that. And, and I would
say certainly with some animals, you see that they
have this very much intermediate phase. I would call
it the teenage phase where they're not really willing
to let loose. And this is something that you
see in orangutans, they do range around the mothers
to begin with. They stay around their mothers for
life, but they keep the contact the much tighter
when they are younger and then they dare to
take the step to, to generate their own social
niche slightly away from her.
Yeah, I guess that this is just for people
to keep in mind the fact that the way
we understand adulthood in human societies or in a
particular human society is not or is not necessarily
the same way that biologists understand adulthood.
No, absolutely not. Yes, I totally agree with that.
So we've talked about neophobia, curiosity culture. Uh What
about creativity? What is creativity exactly from an evolutionary
perspective?
Of course, it's something that is slightly harder to
detect in animals because you need to, to find
a base of, of measuring it. I think it's
um describing how much diversity we can find. For
example, when we are measuring how animals solve problems
and then we can measure creativity in that. How
likely is an individual to do different actions? How
likely is it to come up with new solutions
and try new things? Even if it does not
always lead to the solution. How much um diversity
is it among the explorative actions? And what we
do see is that if we dare to talk
about creativity, but mostly we talk about motor diversity
or exploration diversity that these things facilitate at the
end of the day, how good you are in
terms of performance as well. So, so the ones
that get stuck on the same thing and I
think you can relate to this as a human
very easily. Like if you have, you're trying to
solve something and you keep on trying the same
thing, it's not gonna happen for you. But as
soon as you step back and think outside the
box and you try to approach the problem from
different sides, then you might have that aha experience
and, and, and I think we can definitely pinpoint
those mechanisms already in, in, in the eight relatives
of us.
And, and so, uh again, in orangutans, uh why
are they more exploratory and innovative in captivity? And
I guess that here, again, there are some human
influence that might play a role here.
Right. Yes. So it was certainly that they are
more explorative and more innovative by the sheer fact
that they have more time less cognitive load, less
things to worry about. But also because they do
have more experience with what enrichment of different artifacts
of a kind and what it means to, to
play around with things and the influence of humans
and seeing humans doing things with different things, I
think sparked their interest quite clearly. So we have
famous examples of uh individuals trying to Solway and
the individuals are sort of um trying to copy
their caretakers with cleaning devices. So you know, the
information that they are exposed to is also the
information they are gonna use within their own actions.
A and then there's also things like positive reinforcement,
right? And sometimes even humans themselves actively encourage uh
orangutans or other or individuals from other species to
try to do things like uh they do right
to copy them.
Absolutely. Like they totally, you can motivate them. It's
almost like a slightly uh like a dog like
towards the dom domestication, they, they interact with you
in order to, to perform. And uh another level
is, of course, we don't know how to measure
boredom. But most certainly like if you have time
and if you're giving things and you have the
potential to be a, a curious creative mind from
your nature, then once you put in the situation,
when you get to utilize that creativity, you're gonna
use it. And therefore, I think we see a
lot more innovation. Does it build upon the experience
that they bring with the everyday life they get
according to the artifacts and enrichment experiences, we bring
them.
So what does this tell us about the phylogeny
of creativity? Because creativity is something that we tend
to associate with humans because we tend to be
very anthropocentric. But looking back into these other closely
related apes like orangutans and more uh I mean,
more closely related, I would imagine that there are
also, there would be also be people doing work
with gorillas, chimpanzees and bonobos out there. I mean,
what can we learn about uh by basically the
phylogenetic history of creativity here?
Yeah, I think that by understanding which conditions, illicit
creativity, curiosity, intelligence, all these concepts we've been talking
about understanding which conditions uh spark these things within
our closest relatives is gonna help us understand what
sparked it on an evolutionary perspective in our own
history as well. So, and this is where I
do think that the captive wild wild contradiction that
we do find in these research areas is quite
useful because when we can show that it is
about not having to worry about risks within your
habitat when ecological conditions so to speak, allows for
creativity to bloom if we find it even in,
in species that don't have it in the wild.
But that means they have a seed, they have
a, they have innate prosperity or predisposition for these
traits already because they do need it in small
levels. In their, in their natural environments. And once
we put them in, in environments where there is
no restrictions, these skills uh totally uh inflate. And
uh in terms of, of, of human history, there
is these hypotheses that uh together with colleagues. Uh
AND also uh among other researchers is that there's
a certain point of time where we reach a
level of top predation role. And therefore humans, we
can use the captivity effect to understand or anecdotally
understand what went on in human evolution by understanding
that once we were lost, uh lost that kind
of cognitive load or it freed up and sparked
creativity in our own species.
Uh And so, uh in one of your papers,
you also hypothesize that perhaps something like that could,
could have been behind the upper paleolithic revolution, right?
Where looking back in archaeological, in, into the archaeological
record, we see that apparently there was an an
explosive increase in creativity and so on.
Yes, exactly. I think that coincidence with times where
there's a lot more artifacts, there's a lot more,
more physical creativity to be found in, in the
fossil record. And that is also around the time
where humans became the top predators of their own
niche. So sort of we turned our natural habitat
into the captivity effect. And if we see that
apes who doesn't have those constraints anymore, that increases
their creativity as well. And on top of the,
all of that environmental things comes the social inputs
that also increase when you have a Cooper lifestyle
and more sociality playing a role. So again, the
ecology functioning together with the social components of things
and in captivity of the apes, when you see
an increase in things, their social niche is completely
different to, to a wild ape social niche, because
of the level and magnitudes of social information they
reach of different kinds, we can even talk about
different cultural impacts in terms of a human, mixed
with a more constant group composition. In the case
of orangutans, you'll see that two orangutans are living
in a group whereas in the wild, they don't.
So like alone, those sheer fact is that it
all fits into to how they learn and how
they're learning uh foster their creativity.
And so then it's actually a safe environment and
the safe space that allows for people and other
animals, by the way to become more curious, more
exploratory and more innovative,
right? I would say so, at least in the
hominid lineage, it might not be true for all
animal species. I do think that there might be
depending on the fundamental biology of different species. Uh
There might be cases where the necessity is the
mother of invention when you need to inhabit a
new habitat. But most certainly for the hominid lineage,
I think we're talking about freedom is creating more
innovations. Yeah,
great. So, Doctor Force uh just before we go
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah. So I'm normally uh putting out all kind
of news regarding my research on my web page
and you can find me on X or any
time around international conferences and I'll be happy to
chat to anybody.
Ok, great. So I'm leaving some links to your
work in the description of the interview and thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been fun to talk
with you.
Thank you. Thank you for, for all the interesting
questions.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitten,
bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken H her
ma and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David
Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavla Stassi na
Me, Gary G Alman Sam of Zal Ari and
Y Polton John Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Gilon Cortez or
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams Di A Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey
junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick
Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine
Steinman Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough,
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson Mikela and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers, these
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin John Carlman Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergi Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.